---
title: Mind the Gap
date: 2025-08-04T00:00-05:00
draft: false
description: "Promotions go to those who do the job before they get the title. Discover how to mind the gap and position yourself for the next step in your career."
image: /assets/images/mind-the-gap/mind_the_gap.jpg
comments: false
post: true
categories: [employment, work, career]
---

<img src="{{ site.url }}/assets/images/mind-the-gap/mind_the_gap.jpg" class="img-thumbnail img-right">

It should come as no surprise that managers talk about their teams with one
another: who's high-maintenance and who's easy, who's performing well and who's
not, and who's adding positive energy to the team and who's a cancer. I say it
should come as no surprise, because team members have similar conversations.
What might surprise you are the conversations we have about people we know need
to be promoted. Often, these conversations begin with a manager discussing their
own team members, but plenty of conversations are started by managers who
recognize the value of individuals on other teams. We want to see effort and
value rewarded.

If you've struggled to advance from a junior position to a senior one, or from
individual contributor to management, the question you might be asking is, "How
can I become that person management wants to promote?"

In short: mind the gap.

A gap, as you already know, is the space between two things. In the case of the
London Underground – where the term "[Mind the
Gap](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mind_the_gap)" originated – it's the space
between the landing and the train car. In business it could be the gap between
your experience and what's required for the next level, the amount of work left
undone, opportunities that are missed, or the knowledge and experience that is
lacking in the organization. Or, to put it another way, it's what you're lacking
(internal gaps) or what the organization is lacking (external gaps).

## Internal Gaps

<img src="{{ site.url }}/assets/images/mind-the-gap/know_thyself.jpg" class="img-thumbnail img-right">

Inscribed upon the Temple of Apollo in the ancient Greek precinct of Delphi, was
the phrase, "Know thyself." It was a phrase instructing the reader to understand
what they were capable of, where they fell short, what their potential was, and
above all, to be honest with themselves about it all. After all, no one is
easier to deceive than oneself.

To that end, before you can advance to the next level, you need to understand
where you are. The easiest way to do that is to look at the job ladder for your
position: are you meeting all the requirements for your current position? What
are you lacking for the next position up? What comes naturally, and what
doesn't? There are going to be areas you don't want to focus on, because they
don't come easily, but those are likely the areas you need to work on most.

If your company doesn't have a career ladder designed for your position, you
have a couple options. The first is to look outside your company to see what
other companies have set up. The second is to look at people within your company
who have the position you're aiming for and compare yourself against them. You
might even schedule a conversation with them about how they advanced into the
position.

Although I'm putting this last in the section, it's the most important: talk to
your boss about their perspective on where you fall short. They should know
better than anyone what they're looking for and what's expected, and they should
also know where you are in relation to that next step. Be warned, however, they
may point out that you still have work to do to fulfill your current position.
Regardless of what they say&mdash;nd potentially how they say it&mdash;listen to
them and consider their feedback. They're the one who will be recommending you
for promotion, and ignoring their feedback will only set you up for failure.

## External Gaps

If dealing with your internal gaps is about knowing yourself, then external
gaps are all about knowing your team, your boss, and your organization. It's
about recognizing what they're missing or are unable to get to, and stepping up
to support them. Addressing your internal gaps is like providing an argument
against passing you over due to a lack of competency. Addressing external gaps,
on the other hand, argues for recognizing the position you're already
fulfilling.

If, as they say, "all politics is local," then it makes sense to first focus on
your local environment, i.e. your current team. The first thing to look for is
what's going undone or what would help improve productivity. Other things to
consider are becoming the "go-to person" for information about your project, or
becoming the most helpful person on the team. How you go about that will be
unique to your team, but one thing is for certain: you'll need to outwork
everyone else.

<aside class="panel panel-default pull-right col-md-4">
<h3>True story</h3>
<p>There was an engineer on the first team I managed who regularly asked me if
there was anything I needed help with, for extra work, or he could run meetings
while I was on PTO. After a while, he didn't need to ask, because he was the
first person I thought of when I needed help or needed to delegate work. He
ended up promoted and managing the team when I moved on.</p>
</aside>

Expanding your perspective from looking at the gaps in your team, it's time to
look at the gaps your boss is either overlooking or unable to address. The
easiest thing you can do here is to ask if there's anything you can take of his
or her plate&mdash;It goes without saying that you should do this only when all
your other responsibilities are taken care of. Beyond that, listen for what they
complain about in meetings, or areas of improvement they often "wish" for.
Consider also what you would do when faced with the same decisions and
be&mdash;respectfully&mdash;sound counsel for your manager. Having said all of
this, remember, your goal shouldn't be to replace your manager prematurely, but
by being the obvious choice to replace them when they are promoted or leave.

The last area to look at is your organization. This can be your department,
region, or even the entire company. Regardless of the size, all organizations
have gaps. They tend to be more easily seen in small companiies, but larger
companies have gaps too&mdash;often around their ability to maneuver.

## Miscellaneous

Not everything fits neatly in the categories of internal and external gaps, but
they warrant brief discussions.

### Goals

Before angling for that next promotion, you need to know what it is you're
aiming for, because that will dictate how you fill in the gaps. If you want
promoted on the IC (Individual Contributor) path (e.g. from Software Engineer
to Senior Software Engineer) then the two things you need to do are performing
the work of that next role and consistently outworking your peers. If you
are on the management track, however, doing more IC work may not cut it. In
those cases, your leaders may be looking for your ability to delegate and manage
projects, not just do all the work for the project.

### Capacity

Unfortunately, you could be doing all the right things: working harder, helping
your boss, being the go-to person on your team, and it still may not be enough.
There are any number of reasons for this, but it usually comes down to capacity.
If there are no openings or if there isn't the budget for the promotion, there's
not much you can do. But, there is _something_ you can do.

Hiring freezes and resource constraints are temporary. If you are serious about
moving up to that next rung of the career ladder, use this time to prepare
yourself for that next position; it will open up eventually. Focus on your
growth and do what you can to make sure you're the obvious choice when
constraints ease up.

### Reality

Here's the ice-cold bucket of reality: you are not owed or guaranteed a
promotion, a raise, or even kudos. You may be doing the work of five people and
most of your boss' job, but your company doesn't owe you anything other than a
paycheck and not violate certain laws. It sucks, and maybe it seems unfair, but
that's the way it is. If you're in this sort of position, you should talk to
your manager to find out why.

"But I'm the victim or racism, sexism, ageism, homophobia, religiophobia, or
some other -ism or -phobia." You might be. It happens, and you would be
surprised at how frequently it happens. It could also be that someone doesn't
like you in particular. This also happens. Everyone has obstacles they're trying
to overcome. Everyone. Some people have larger obstacles than others. Some
people are smarter, prettier, or better socially than others. It's reality. The
way to get around that is to "[be so good they can't ignore
you](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/13525945-so-good-they-can-t-ignore-you)."

I've mentioned "career ladder" a couple times in this article, but the reality
is that oftentimes the "ladder" is more like a jungle gym, where you move
horizontally or downward in order to move up to the position you really want. In
both cases above, the way forward may be to move horizontally or (what feels
like) backwards. Leaving your role for another, even if it's inside your
company, can feel like a setback, but is it worse than waiting on something
that's out of your control or actively working against you?

## Final Thoughts

"Mind the gap." It's not only good advice for stepping off a subway car, it's
also good for your career. The gaps you face can be internal: skills,
experience, knowledge, or even your network. Gaps can also be found externally:
the work your boss isn't able to get to or isn't aware of, opportunities on your
team, and also areas in your organization which go unnoticed. Sometimes gaps are
too big to overcome because of limited resources, discrimination, or something
else entirely. Some gaps can only be overcome by going around or even backwards.

Promotions rarely go to the person who simply wants the job&mdash;they go to the
person who's ready to fill it. Look around, where are the gaps? Fill them.
Quietly. Consistently. Continuously. When the time comes, no one will question
whether you're ready; they'll assume the job is yours.
