---
Title: Portfolio
description: "I get to work with a lot of companies and help them bring their
products to market. This is just a sampling of my work."
post: false
comments: false
---

It can be a little scary to hire an independent developer. Are they really who
they claim to be? Can they really do what they say they can? How do I know
they have the knowledge and experience to meet my project and my company's
needs?

These are great questions and I would love the opportunity to speak with you
about them, but I would also encourage you to reach out to any of the companies
I've worked with in the past (listed below) and discover for yourself if I
meet your project's needs

When you find out I'm a good match, [reach out to me](/contact). Let's build something amazing.

## Recent Projects

[LiveBlueKC](http://livebluekc.bluekc.com/mobileapp):
The LiveBlue iOS app from Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Kansas City enables
users to find healthy locations, activities and events throughout the Kansas
City area. Whether it’s a farmers market, fitness center, neighborhood park or
5k race, the Live Blue app is your key to a healthier lifestyle.

<img src="//samuelmullen.com/images/portfolio/liveblue.jpg" alt="liveblue" class="img-left img-thumbnail">

For my part in this project, I was responsible for designing the and creating
the architecture which provides the mobile app with the data it displays to the
users. I also developed an administrative tool which allows the LiveBlue team to
import and modify data from Foursquare, see reporting on app usage, and modify
any other data necessary.

I am continuing to develop new data services and am providing ongoing support.

---

[City Union Mission](http://cityunionmission.org): Since 1924, City Union
Mission has provided warm beds, nutritious food, and a place of safety for
thousands of poverty-stricken and homeless men, women, and children. The
mission receives no government funding, but instead depends solely on
contributions.

The Mission has a rather substantial Ruby on Rails application for which I have
been brought in to take over development. I take this project very seriously,
and recognize that every minute I spend on the project is money provided by
contributions. I do everything I can to keep costs low without neglecting the
quality of the product I deliver.

---

[WeeJay](http://weejay.fm): It wasn't too long ago that bars and restaurants had
jukeboxes to allow their patrons to choose what music was played. Now, with
WeeJay, we're bringing that experience back...from your phone. Choose venues
nearby, search for music from our extensive database, queue up songs to be
played, and favorite those other patrons chose.

<img src="//samuelmullen.com/images/portfolio/weejay.png" alt="liveblue" class="img-left img-thumbnail">

I've partnering with [CremaLab](http://cremalab.com) on this project. While
there is an iPhone component, I am responsible for creating the architecture
which facilitates communication between the database and the mobile app, allows
music to be queued and administered, and enables venues to administer their
settings and account.

---

[RunTitle](http://runtitle.com) is the only online marketplace for mineral
ownership information. We’ve teamed up with professional landmen and oil & gas
companies from around the nation to create a powerful platform unlike anything
this industry has seen. Reports are added daily from our list of trusted land
professionals.

<img src="//samuelmullen.com/images/portfolio/runtitle.jpg" alt="liveblue" class="img-left img-thumbnail">

RunTitle is a project I inherited. Many developers would feel the need to "fix"
all the code, but I understand both budget and time constraints. The app was
working when I took over, so I've only fixed things when they've shown
themselves to be buggy or when they've affected new features.

## Past Projects

[Endurance Lending Network](http://enduranceln.com): Endurance Lending Network
is a web-based lending platform which connects small businesses looking for up
to $500K of debt capital with non-traditional lending sources (accredited
individuals, family offices, wealth management platforms, debt funds, etc.)

The team is located in California, and I was brought in to maintain and simplify
the current code base, and to take on future development. 

---

[AC-U-KWIK](https://itunes.apple.com/app/ac-u-kwik-north-america/id403330830?mt=8)
is an iPhone app to aid pilots of smaller aircraft to plan their flights. 
[Penton Media](http://penton.com) brought me in to this project to maintenance
it, correct bugs and address customer complaints, and to keep them up to date on
changes in the iOS platform.

---

**The Strategic Quality Support System (SQSS)** is a product developed to enable
hospitals and other health providers to monitor the compliancy of tasks, handle
problems as they arise, and provide reports on the general quality status of a
provider.

I partnered with [Databasically](http://databasically.com), [Envisage Consulting](http://www.envisageconsulting.org/), and [D. D. Bainbridge and Associates, Inc.](http://ddbainbridge.com) to develop this product. 

---

[DailySpecial](http://dailyspecial.com) is a site designed to answer the
question, "Where can I find a place to eat nearby which is offering great
specials?" It's a sort of search engine for specials. 

This was a fun project to be a part of. Search, geolocation, HTML5, social
aspects, JavaScript: this project had it all. It was just the product owner, a
designer and myself, and we brought it to life.

---

[Southern Attraction](http://southernattraction.com) was a dating site I worked
on. I handled all the search, social aspects, and architecture of the app. The
idea was pretty simple, allow your friends and people you actually know to help
you find a good match.

---

**MadeForView** was proof to me that some projects actually have an end date.
This was a simple web API accessed by iPads in order to shut them down if they
got outside of a certain area. I got to partner with my friends at [Big Swing](http://bigswing.com) on this project.

---

[Citadel Technologies](http://cittech.com) reached out to me to move their
previous application into the cloud. They have a lot of calculations they use to
correctly assess the damage pipelines have sustained and how much of their
material will be required to repair it. The calculater I developed for them
allows them to do just that; from anywhere and on any device.

---

[A. D. Banker](http://adbanker.com) brought me on board to help them maintain
their legacy e-learning shopping cart system. The framework was mostly written
in perl which I was pretty strong in back in the day (just don't tell anyone).
