---
title: "12 Freelancer Archetypes"
description: "Twelve different freelancers you're likely to eventually work with."
date: 2015-02-06
comments: true
post: true
categories: [freelancing]
---

The following freelancer archetypes are based on personal experience working
with other freelancers, stories told to me by clients and other business owners,
and other sources. I'm being a bit harsh about my profession, but it's all in
good fun and not meant to disparage anyone.

Special thanks to [Matt Petty](http://twitter.com/lodestone) at [Kizmeta](http://kizmeta.com) for all the great images, and putting up with me.

## Houdini

<img src="//samuelmullen.com/images/freelancer_archetypes/smaller_houdini.png" class="img-thumbnail img-right">

Named after the great magician and escape artist, Harry Houdini, the Houdini is
a freelancer who starts off great, being productive, responsive to inquiries,
providing updates, etc. Then, inexplicably, the Houdini just disappears.
Regardless of the means or the effort used to contact him, the Houdini can't be
found, and the client is left with an unfinished product.

<div class="clearfix"></div>

## Spli7 P3rs0n@li7y

<img src="//samuelmullen.com/images/freelancer_archetypes/smaller_splitpersonality.png" class="img-thumbnail img-right">

Although many freelancers get their start while working full time and picking up
work on the side, most are able to keep straight what they're supposed to be
working on; the Spli7 P3rs0n@li7y freelancer can't. This freelancer will likely
get her client's work done, but it may be at the expense of her employer,
because she has a difficult time remembering where and when it's appropriate to
perform client work. The Spli7 P3rs0n@li7y also has a hard time understanding
with whom it's appropriate to talk to about client work (her manager may not be
the best choice).

<div class="clearfix"></div>

## Jack of All Trades

<img src="//samuelmullen.com/images/freelancer_archetypes/smaller_jackofalltrades.png" class="img-thumbnail img-right">

We all know a Jack. This is the guy who knows a little bit about everything and
makes it seem like he's a master of it all, but he's not. Jack knows a little
bit about programming, a little bit about design, a bit about copywriting, and a
smidge about marketing. He might be able to eventually get your project up and
running, but you'd have an easier job untangling Gordian's knot than the mess
Jack creates.

<div class="clearfix"></div>

## The Diva

<img src="//samuelmullen.com/images/freelancer_archetypes/smaller_diva.png" class="img-thumbnail img-right">

Life is hard for the Diva. She can scarcely believe businesses actually expect
her to work on site occasionally let alone in that cube. And can you believe
they didn't provide her with her own complet? Some clients even expect her to
meet deadlines, and worse still, track her progress in *their* project
management tool. She sometimes wonders if her clients still live in caves.

<div class="clearfix"></div>

## The Grinder

<img src="//samuelmullen.com/images/freelancer_archetypes/smaller_grinder.png" class="img-thumbnail img-right">

If you want something done, the Grinder is your man. He's super reliable and
ready to work, and he's on a mission to check his todos off, one by one. While
he may be passionate about many things, your project is not one of them. He's
there to get it done, get it off his plate, and move on to the next todo item.

<div class="clearfix"></div>

## The Elitist

<img src="//samuelmullen.com/images/freelancer_archetypes/smaller_elitist.png" class="img-thumbnail img-right">

Similar in many ways to the Diva, the Elitist can hardly believe your company
is still in business. Rather than fainting at the uncivilised manner in which
his clients work and have kept their business afloat, he just mocks them and
explains slowly and in small words how he would have done things so much better.

<div class="clearfix"></div>

## The Liar

<img src="//samuelmullen.com/images/freelancer_archetypes/smaller_liar.png" class="img-thumbnail img-right">

The Liar is, as you would expect, and bald-faced liar. When asked if he can do
something, the answer is always, "Yes". When asked for a status update, it will
always be, "I'm almost done". There are two types of liars, however. There is
one Liar who, after saying he can do something, will then bust his butt to learn
it and get things done. Then there is the other Liar: he'll just take the money
and run.

<div class="clearfix"></div>

## The Orchestrator

<img src="//samuelmullen.com/images/freelancer_archetypes/smaller_orchestrator.png" class="img-thumbnail img-right">

Some freelancers work night and day trying to handle as many obligations as they
have on their plate. The Orchestrator does this too, only she arranges for
everything to be done by someone else. Whether it's outsourcing programming to
India, finding cheap copywriters on a freelancing board, or hiring highschool
students to build websites, the Orchestrator pulls the strings to get her work
done. Always able to find work and talent, she will eventually evolve into an
agency.

<div class="clearfix"></div>

## The Perfectionist

Nothing is ever good enough for the perfectionist. Not that font, color,
wording, line of code, or even that email. She just needs a little more time to
get things right. You will never see your project completed.

*None of Matt's versions of this archetype were good enough*

## The Lone Gunman

<img src="//samuelmullen.com/images/freelancer_archetypes/smaller_lone_gunman.png" class="img-thumbnail img-right">

He's a mystery man, quiet, cool, and collected. He works alone. He can get the
job done ... for a price. After learning what the job is all about, he just
walks away, promising to return one day. After three months, he walks into your
office with your completed project: none of it's correct because he didn't
bother to communicate with you during that three months.

<div class="clearfix"></div>

## The Mad Scientist

<img src="//samuelmullen.com/images/freelancer_archetypes/smaller_mad_scientist.png" class="img-thumbnail img-right">

Some people experiement on animals, and some on people, and then there are those
who choose to experiment on their clients. "What's this new
framework/methodology/style/technique do? Let's find out!" To find out, of
course, this freelancer needs a project to experiment upon, and what better
project than one of his client's. The project will end up with the latest and
greatest, but will go over budget because of the extra time it took him to
finish his experiements.

<div class="clearfix"></div>

## Bartleby

<img src="//samuelmullen.com/images/freelancer_archetypes/smaller_bartleby.png" class="img-thumbnail img-right">

Named after Herman Melville's character, [Bartleby the Scrivener](http://www.bartleby.com/129/), this freelancer
begins her work at a frantic pace, but slowly over time her pace slackens. As
further requests come in, she merely responds with, "I would prefer not to." She
eventually cannot be roused to do anything; life itself becoming something she'd
"prefer not to."

<div class="clearfix"></div>
