---
title: "Workload Based Marketing"
description: "Helping freelancers market regardless of their workload, but according to their workload."
date: 2012-12-24
comments: true
post: true
categories: [marketing, business, freelancing]
---

I've been working through the book,["Get Clients Now,"](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B001O0EGQY?ie=UTF8&keywords=get%20clients%20now&qid=1356149801&ref_=sr_1_1&sr=8-1)
as part of my never ending quest to attract and develop new clients. In the
book, the author suggests you choose ten activities you can complete on a daily
or weekly basis over a period of twenty-eight days. As I was discussing with my
wife some of the activities I was considering (blogging, answering
[StackOverflow](http://stackoverflow.com) questions, attending networking
events, reaching out to contacts, etc.), she stated rather bluntly, "You're
setting yourself up for failure."

It sounds harsh, but it was really what I needed to hear. My wife worked in
sales for a number of years and she recognized immediately the effort required
to complete all the activities I had on my list. More importantly, she
understands me and the effect it would have on me.

You see, as of this writing I am finishing up two projects and I'm gearing up to
start three new ones - one which includes an unfamiliar technology. My wife
knows that if I meet all my clients' needs AND attempt to meet all ten of my
marketing goals, something will have to give; probably a lot of somethings. And
because I'm highly goal oriented, she knows I would beat myself up for not
meeting all my expectations, and waste a lot of energy and time trying to figure
out why I couldn't get it all done.

<img src="//samuelmullen.com/images/workload_based_marketing/Balance.jpg" class="img-right img-thumbnail">

My wife's years of sales experience helped her recognize the obvious: I was
trying to do too much. Part of what kept me from recognizing the same was my own
inexperience with the demands of marketing, the rest was me blindly following
recipes out of a book.

But from her insight and fresh perspective, I've come up with a new marketing
strategy for myself which I've dubbed...

## Workload Based Marketing

It's not rocket science, and it's certainly not an earth-shattering discovery,
but it was eye-opening for me and where I was at. It starts with these three
rules:

### 1. Focus on Current Clients First

Here's the deal, you already have actual clients. Marketing represents clients
you *might* get, and who *might* have money. If you have to choose between
marketing and investing in relationships with your current clients, choose the
latter; it's the only decision guaranteed to pay dividends every time.

### 2. No Marketing Effort is Too Small

Like I said, clients always come first, but I also know none of us are
heads-down 24/7. There's always time in a week for at least something. Maybe
it's making a couple phone calls one day, eating lunch with a contact another
day, or just getting a paragraph or two on that next blog post. 

The point is to keep up the momentum. Momentum from small efforts can lead to
big opportunities. 

### 3. Waiting is Stupid

In "Get Clients Now", the author instructs you to start your system on a
Saturday. I had planned on starting mine on the first Saturday of the new year,
after the holidays were over. 

My wife asked, "Why do you want to wait to find clients?"

Ummmm....

### The Plan(s)

<img src="//samuelmullen.com/images/workload_based_marketing/planz.jpg" class="img-right img-thumbnail">

With those rules in mind, let's look at the plan itself. 

Based on the name alone, you should already get the basic idea of "Workload
Based Marketing": if you have a lot of work on your plate, don't push yourself
to market so much; if your workload is light, increase your marketing efforts
accordingly.

More than that, though, and before you start anything, devise plans for yourself
which you can execute according to the intensity of your workload. To keep it
simple, create three plans: one for when your workload is light; one for when
it's moderate, and then one for those times when you're swamped. For example,
I've created plans for myself based on possible workload, each with a variety of
activities suggested from "Get Clients Now" or from my own marketing
preferences.

Having these plans established ahead of time allows you to "just go on
autopilot" rather than burning a lot of cycles trying to figure out what to do.
You won't need to waste time thinking about things, you'll just be able to go.
Organizing your plans around a weekly schedule is probably the simplest
solution.

"Get Clients Now" is a great book, and every freelancer should read it at least
once and consider the author's suggestions. In it, she gives some great advice
for getting started, setting goals, and strategies for the different stages of
the marketing cycle. But remember also, no system is perfect. Adjust whatever
system you settle on to match your own needs, and prepare your plans ahead of
time so that when storms hit, you can be ready with something to do, rather than
wasting precious time and energy.

One last thought, review your plans in light of the end goal: right clients,
right projects, and right price. Make certain your strategies and tactics are
aimed at the right audience. Use your time wisely on existing clients first, and
then pick the plan matching your workload to find the prospects who fit the
profile you desire.
