---
title: 3,652 Days
description: "Looking back over ten years of marriage"
date: 2009-12-04
post: true
categories: [marriage, anniversaries]
---

By this time in most peoples' marriages they would look back and say something like, "well, we've had some rough times, but we've made it." I really can't say that. I mean, Ronda and I have had some rough times - her deep vein thrombosis, her mother's death, lay-offs, me completing my degree, becoming parents, etc. - but none of the difficulty arose from our relationship. To be honest, being married to Ronda has been pretty easy, although I'm not sure she can say the same thing.

At my niece's wedding I defined love not as an emotion, but as an act of sacrifice for another person. Since that time I have become increasingly convinced that I am correct in that definition. That is how I know how much my wife loves me and our children.

I don't recognize it as fully as I should, but I know my wife pours everything she has into our marriage and into our family. In every area of our life, she gives. In order to help make ends meet, she works three part-time jobs. In order to be more a part of our children's lives, she volunteers with their schools. To ensure our children's education, she lets them stay up later so she can read to them. To make sure we are a close knit family, she makes sure we have traditions, memories, and meals at the kitchen table. For the sake of our family and for the happiness of the children and me, she does whatever it takes.

So, to the wife of my youth, thank you for giving so much so that our children have happy memories; thank you for putting up with me; thank you for your unending support and your continued belief in me; thank you for everything you do to make our household work;&nbsp;thank you for making these ten years so wonderful; for your countless sacrifices - for your overwhelming love - thank you.

Happy anniversary, Angel. I love you. I'm yours for ten more years and forever.
